All of the programs we’ve studied so far have sent their output
to the console window by calling System.out.print or System.out.
println. But just as you can read input from a file instead of
reading from the console, you can write output to a file
instead of writing it to the console. There are many ways to
accomplish this task. The simplest approach is to take advantage
of what you already know. You’ve already learned all about how
print and println statements work, and you can leverage that
knowledge to easily create output files. 

If you look at Sun’s Java documentation, you will find that
System.out is a variable that stores a reference to an object
of type PrintStream. The print and println statements you’ve
been writing are calls on methods that are part of the
PrintStream class. The variable System.out stores a reference
to a special PrintStream object that is tied to the console
window. However, you can construct other PrintStream objects
that send their output to other places. Suppose, for example,
that you want to send output to a file called results.txt. You
can construct a PrintStream object as follows: 

PrintStream output = new PrintStream(new File("results.txt"));

This line of code looks a lot like the one we used to construct
a Scanner tied to an input file. In this case, the computer is
creating an output file. If no such file already exists, the
program creates it. If such a file does exist, the computer
overwrites the current version. Initially, the file will be
empty. It will end up containing whatever output you tell it
to produce through calls on print and println.

The line of code that constructs a PrintStream object can
generate an exception if Java is unable to create the file
you’ve described. There are many reasons that this might happen:
You might not have permission to write to the directory, or the
file might be locked because another program is using it. Like
the line of code that creates a filebased Scanner, this line of
code potentially throws a FileNotFoundException. Therefore, Java
requires you to include the throws clause in whatever method
contains this line of code. The simplest approach is to put this
line in main. In fact, it is common practice to have the main
method begin with the lines of code that deal with the input
and output files.

Once you have constructed a PrintStream object, how do you use
it? You should already have a good idea of what to do. We have
been making calls on System.out.print and System.out.println
since Chapter 1. If you recall everything you know about
System.out you’ll have a good idea of what to do, but for this
program, you will call output.print instead of System.out.print
and output.println instead of System.out.println.

As a simple example, remember that in Chapter 1 we looked at
the following variation of the simple “hello world” program
that produces several lines of output:

1 public class Hello2 {
2 public static void main(String[] args) {
3 System.out.println("Hello, world!");
4 System.out.println();

and so on, and so on, and so on...